Datasets
========

NeMo ASR models expect data as a set of audio files plus a manifest file describing each utterance.

.. _section-with-manifest-format-explanation:

Manifest Format
---------------

Each line of the manifest is a JSON object:

.. code-block:: json

  {"audio_filepath": "/path/to/audio.wav", "text": "the transcription of the utterance", "duration": 23.147}

* ``audio_filepath`` — absolute or relative path to the audio file (WAV recommended)
* ``text`` — the transcript
* ``duration`` — duration in seconds

There should be one manifest per dataset split (train, validation, test). Pass it via ``training_ds.manifest_filepath=<path>``.


.. _canary-manifest-format:

Canary Manifest Format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Canary multi-task models require additional manifest keys to control transcription, translation, punctuation, and other behaviors.
The required and optional keys differ between Canary v1 and Canary Flash / v2.

**Canary v1** (e.g., ``canary-1b``):

.. code-block:: json

  {"audio_filepath": "audio.wav", "text": "hello world", "duration": 3.5, "source_lang": "en", "task": "asr", "target_lang": "en", "pnc": "yes"}

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Key
    - Required
    - Description
  * - ``source_lang``
    - Yes
    - Input audio language (ISO code, e.g. ``en``, ``de``, ``es``)
  * - ``target_lang``
    - Yes
    - Output transcription language
  * - ``task``
    - Yes
    - ``"asr"`` (transcribe) or ``"ast"`` (translate)
  * - ``pnc``
    - Yes
    - ``"yes"`` or ``"no"`` — enable punctuation and capitalization

**Canary Flash / v2** (e.g., ``canary-1b-flash``, ``canary-1b-v2``):

The ``task`` field has been removed; the model infers ASR vs translation from the language pair.
Additional optional keys control features like timestamps, ITN, and diarization.

.. code-block:: json

  {"audio_filepath": "audio.wav", "text": "hello world", "duration": 3.5, "source_lang": "en", "target_lang": "en", "pnc": "yes"}

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Key
    - Required
    - Description
  * - ``source_lang``
    - Yes
    - Input audio language (ISO code)
  * - ``target_lang``
    - Yes
    - Output transcription language. Same as ``source_lang`` for ASR; different for translation.
  * - ``pnc``
    - No (default: ``"yes"``)
    - ``"yes"`` or ``"no"`` — punctuation and capitalization
  * - ``itn``
    - No (default: ``"no"``)
    - ``"yes"`` or ``"no"`` — inverse text normalization
  * - ``timestamp``
    - No (default: ``"no"``)
    - ``"yes"`` or ``"no"`` — predict word-level timestamps
  * - ``diarize``
    - No (default: ``"no"``)
    - ``"yes"`` or ``"no"`` — diarize speech
  * - ``decodercontext``
    - No (default: ``""``)
    - Previous transcript or other context to bias predictions
  * - ``emotion``
    - No (default: ``"undefined"``)
    - Speaker emotion hint (``"neutral"``, ``"angry"``, ``"happy"``, ``"sad"``, ``"undefined"``)

During fine-tuning, these keys are read from the manifest and encoded as prompt tokens.
During inference, they can be provided either in the manifest or as arguments to ``model.transcribe()``.

.. _Tarred_Datasets:

Tarred Datasets
---------------

For cluster training with distributed file systems, tar your audio files to avoid reading many small files.
Use ``is_tarred: true`` in the config and provide tarball paths via ``tarred_audio_filepaths``.

NeMo uses `WebDataset <https://github.com/tmbdev/webdataset>`_ for tarred data.

**Convert to tarred format:**

.. code-block:: bash

  python scripts/speech_recognition/convert_to_tarred_audio_dataset.py \
    --manifest_path=<manifest> \
    --target_dir=<output_dir> \
    --num_shards=64 \
    --max_duration=<float representing maximum duration of audio samples> \
    --min_duration=<float representing minimum duration of audio samples> \
    --shuffle --shuffle_seed=0

This script shuffles the entries in the given manifest (if ``--shuffle`` is set, which we recommend), filter
audio files according to ``min_duration`` and ``max_duration``, and tar the remaining audio files to the directory
``--target_dir`` in ``n`` shards, along with separate manifest and metadata files.

The files in the target directory should look similar to the following:

.. code::

  target_dir/
  ├── audio_1.tar
  ├── audio_2.tar
  ├── ...
  ├── metadata.yaml
  ├── tarred_audio_manifest.json
  ├── sharded_manifests/
      ├── manifest_1.json
      ├── ...
      └── manifest_N.json


Note that file structures are flattened such that all audio files are at the top level in each tarball. This ensures that
filenames are unique in the tarred dataset and the filepaths do not contain "-sub" and forward slashes in each ``audio_filepath`` are
simply converted to underscores. For example, a manifest entry for ``/data/directory1/file.wav`` would be ``_data_directory1_file.wav``
in the tarred dataset manifest, and ``/data/directory2/file.wav`` would be converted to ``_data_directory2_file.wav``.

Sharded manifests are generated by default; this behavior can be toggled via the ``no_shard_manifests`` flag.

To use an existing tarred dataset instead of a non-tarred dataset, set ``is_tarred: true`` in
the experiment config file. Then, pass in the paths to all of the audio tarballs in ``tarred_audio_filepaths``, either as a list
of filepaths, e.g. ``['/data/shard1.tar', '/data/shard2.tar']``, or in a single brace-expandable string, e.g.
``'/data/shard_{1..64}.tar'`` or ``'/data/shard__OP_1..64_CL_'`` (recommended, see note below).

.. note::
  For brace expansion, there may be cases where ``{x..y}`` syntax cannot be used due to shell interference. This occurs most commonly
  inside SLURM scripts. Therefore, we provide a few equivalent replacements. Supported opening braces (equivalent to ``{``) are ``(``,
  ``[``, ``<`` and the special tag ``_OP_``. Supported closing braces (equivalent to ``}``) are ``)``, ``]``, ``>`` and the special
  tag ``_CL_``. For SLURM based tasks, we suggest the use of the special tags for ease of use.

As with non-tarred datasets, the manifest file should be passed in ``manifest_filepath``. The dataloader assumes that the length
of the manifest after filtering is the correct size of the dataset for reporting training progress.

The ``tarred_shard_strategy`` field of the config file can be set if you have multiple shards and are running an experiment with
multiple workers. It defaults to ``scatter``, which preallocates a set of shards per worker which do not change during runtime.
Note that this strategy, on specific occasions (when the number of shards is not divisible with ``world_size``), will not sample
the entire dataset. As an alternative the ``replicate`` strategy, will preallocate the entire set of shards to every worker and not
change it during runtime. The benefit of this strategy is that it allows each worker to sample data points from the entire dataset
independently of others. Note, though, that more than one worker may sample the same shard, and even sample the same data points!
As such, there is no assured guarantee that all samples in the dataset will be sampled at least once during 1 epoch. Note that
for these reasons it is not advisable to use tarred datasets as validation and test datasets.

For more information about the individual tarred datasets and the parameters available, including shuffling options,
see the corresponding class APIs in the :ref:`Datasets <asr-api-datasets>` section.

.. warning::
  If using multiple workers, the number of shards should be divisible by the world size to ensure an even
  split among workers. If it is not divisible, logging will give a warning but training will proceed, but likely hang at the last epoch.
  In addition, if using distributed processing, each shard must have the same number of entries after filtering is
  applied such that each worker ends up with the same number of files. We currently do not check for this in any dataloader, but the user's
  program may hang if the shards are uneven.

.. _Bucketing_Datasets:

Bucketing
---------

The script ``scripts/speech_recognition/convert_to_tarred_audio_dataset.py`` offers a ``--buckets_num`` option that enables
static bucketing by sorting data into separate duration-based buckets at pre-processing time.
This approach is deprecated in favor of :ref:`dynamic bucketing <lhotse-dataloading>` enabled with Lhotse, which doesn't require special pre-processing.

If you do wish to proceed with static bucketing, pass the tarred datasets as a list of lists in your training config:

.. code-block:: yaml

  train_ds:
    manifest_filepath: [[bucket1/manifest.json], [bucket2/manifest.json], ...]
    tarred_audio_filepaths: [[bucket1/audio__OP_0..63_CL_.tar], [bucket2/audio__OP_0..63_CL_.tar], ...]
    bucketing_batch_size: null  # set to a list of ints for adaptive batch sizes per bucket


Lhotse Dataloading
------------------

NeMo supports `Lhotse <https://github.com/lhotse-speech/lhotse>`_ for advanced dataloading with dynamic batch sizes, dynamic bucketing, OOMptimizer, and multi-dataset configuration.

See :doc:`Lhotse Dataloading </dataloaders>` for full documentation.
