scripts/chime7/README.md, before:


### TODO: Administrative Section

- [x] Clone internal NVIDIA NeMo Gitlab repo branch to `github.com/tango4j/NeMo/tree/dev/chime7`.  

- [x] Push NeMo manifest creation script to `https://github.com/tango4j/NeMo/tree/dev/chime7/scripts/chime7`.  

- [x] Convert two bash scripts (GSS, RNNT-ASR-BSD) to python based script.  

- [ ] Add Whisper text-normalization (as in the original challenge implementation)

- [ ] Add Ante's pre-dereverbration to NeMo Multichannel diarization.

- [ ] Make inference script in (1) Class based structure (2) And make separate yaml file or dataConfig-class

- [x] Clean and organize environment setting again 

- [ ] Setup and check the training script of NeMo multichannel diarization

- [ ] Setup Optuna script and re-optimize including the new dataset

- [ ] Plug-in 3rd party ASR (Whisper-v3, wavLM) and report the dev/eval-set performance.

# CHiME-8 DASR Baseline Environment Setup

## SubTracks

### SubTrack-1
### SubTrack-2


## Environment Setup

This README outlines the steps to set up your environment for the required operations. Please follow these steps in the order presented to ensure a proper setup.

### Prerequisites

- Ensure that you have `git`, `pip`, and `bash` installed on your system.
- It's assumed that you have CUDA 11.x compatible hardware and drivers installed for `cupy-cuda11x` to work properly.

## TLDR; 

This environment is based on the assumption that you installed the latest `NeMo` on your conda environment named `chime8_baseline`

```bash
conda activate chime8_baseline
pip install espnet
git clone https://github.com/espnet/espnet.git /workspace/espnet
pip uninstall -y 'cupy-cuda118'
pip install --no-cache-dir -f https://pip.cupy.dev/pre/ "cupy-cuda11x[all]==12.1.0"
pip install git+http://github.com/desh2608/gss
pip install optuna
pip install lhotse==1.14.0
pip install --upgrade jiwer
./hyper_optim/ngc_install_lm.sh "/your/path/to/NeMo"
```

### Detailed Installation Steps for ESPnet and Related Tools

Use pip to install ESPnet, a toolkit for end-to-end speech processing.

```bash
pip install espnet
```

Clone the ESPnet repository into the `/workspace/espnet` directory.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/espnet/espnet.git /workspace/espnet
```

If you have `cupy-cuda118` installed, uninstall it.

```bash
pip uninstall -y 'cupy-cuda118'
```

Install version `12.1.0` of `cupy-cuda11x`. This is done from a pre-release channel.

```bash
pip install --no-cache-dir -f https://pip.cupy.dev/pre/ "cupy-cuda11x[all]==12.1.0"
```

Install GSS from the provided GitHub repository.

```bash
pip install git+http://github.com/desh2608/gss
```

Optuna, a hyperparameter optimization framework, is installed via pip.

```bash
pip install optuna
```

Install a specific version of Lhotse (`1.14.0`).
Lhotse is mainly needed for Guided Source Separation (GSS) part.

```bash
pip install lhotse==1.14.0
```

Upgrade Jiwer, a package for evaluating automatic speech recognition.
Jiwer is needed for evaluating and normalizing the text.

```bash
pip install --upgrade jiwer
```

Run the script to install the language model.

```bash
./hyper_optim/ngc_install_lm.sh
```

# How to launch NeMo CHiME-8 Baseline

## 1. Create NeMo style manifest files

This script will generate NeMo style 

```bash
NEMO_ROOT="/your/path/to/NeMo" # cloned NeMo branch: dev/chime7
NEMO_MSASR_MANIFEST="/your/path/to/nemo_msasr_manifest" # Folder that contains nemo manifest .json files
CHIME7_CLEANED_DATA_FOLDER="/your/path/to/chime7_official_cleaned" # Folder that contains sub-folders named: chime6, dipco, mixer6
python ${NEMO_ROOT}/scripts/chime7/manifests/prepare_nemo_manifest_rttm_ctm_for_infer.py --data-dir ${CHIME7_CLEANED_DATA_FOLDER} --subset ${DATA_SPLIT} --output-dir ${NEMO_MSASR_MANIFEST} \
```

## 2. Setup global varialbes (This is temporary, will be removed in the final format)

Modify the path in the inference script: `<NeMo Root>/scripts/chime7/hyper_optim/infer_e2e_t385_chime7.py`

```python
NEMO_ROOT="/your/path/to/NeMo" 
ESPNET_ROOT="/your/path/to/espnet/egs2/chime7_task1/asr1"
CHIME7_ROOT="/your/path/to/chime7_official_cleaned" 
```


## 3. Launch CHiME-8 Baseline 

Before launch the following script, make sure to activate your Conda environment.
```bash
conda activate chime8_baseline
```

Make sure to setup your CHIME8 Data path, temporary directory with write permissions and NeMo root path where NeMo toolkit is cloned.

```bash
###########################################################################
### YOUR CUSTOMIZED CONFIGURATIONS HERE ###################################
NEMO_ROOT=/path/to/NeMo
CHECKPOINTS=/path/to/checkpoints
TEMP_DIR=/temp/path/to/chime8_baseline_each1sess
CHIME_DATA_ROOT=/path/to/chime7_official_cleaned
SCENARIOS="[mixer6,chime6,dipco]"
DIAR_CONFIG="chime8-baseline-mixer6-short1"
###########################################################################
cd $NEMO_ROOT
export CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES="0"

SCRIPT_NAME=${NEMO_ROOT}/scripts/chime7/pipeline/run_full_pipeline.py
python -c "import kenlm; print('kenlm imported successfully')" || exit 1

CONFIG_PATH=${NEMO_ROOT}/scripts/chime7/pipeline
YAML_NAME="chime_config_t385.yaml"

ASR_MODEL_PATH=${CHECKPOINTS}/rnnt_ft_chime6ANDmixer6_26jun_avged.nemo
LM_MODEL_PATH=${CHECKPOINTS}/7gram_0001.kenlm
VAD_MODEL_PATH=${CHECKPOINTS}/frame_vad_chime7_acrobat.nemo
MSDD_MODEL_PATH=${CHECKPOINTS}/msdd_v2_PALO_bs6_a003_version6_e53.ckpt 

SITE_PACKAGES=`$(which python) -c 'import site; print(site.getsitepackages()[0])'`
export KENLM_ROOT=$NEMO_ROOT/decoders/kenlm
export KENLM_LIB=$NEMO_ROOT/decoders/kenlm/build/bin
export PYTHONPATH=$NEMO_ROOT/decoders:$PYTHONPATH
export PYTHONPATH=$SITE_PACKAGES/kenlm-0.2.0-py3.10-linux-x86_64.egg:$PYTHONPATH
export PYTHONPATH=$NEMO_ROOT:$PYTHONPATH

python ${SCRIPT_NAME} --config-path="${CONFIG_PATH}" --config-name="$YAML_NAME" \
diar_config=${DIAR_CONFIG} \
chime_data_root=${CHIME_DATA_ROOT} \
output_root=${TEMP_DIR} \
scenarios=${SCENARIOS} \
subsets="[dev]" \
asr_model_path=${ASR_MODEL_PATH} \
lm_model_path=${LM_MODEL_PATH} \
diarizer.vad.model_path=${VAD_MODEL_PATH} \
diarizer.msdd_model.model_path=${MSDD_MODEL_PATH} \
```

Commit message:

Updated the launcher script and README for variables
Signed-off-by: Taejin Park <tango4j@gmail.com>

scripts/chime7/README.md, after:


### TODO: Administrative Section

- [x] Clone internal NVIDIA NeMo Gitlab repo branch to `github.com/tango4j/NeMo/tree/dev/chime7`.  

- [x] Push NeMo manifest creation script to `https://github.com/tango4j/NeMo/tree/dev/chime7/scripts/chime7`.  

- [x] Convert two bash scripts (GSS, RNNT-ASR-BSD) to python based script.  

- [ ] Add Whisper text-normalization (as in the original challenge implementation)

- [ ] Add Ante's pre-dereverbration to NeMo Multichannel diarization.

- [ ] Make inference script in (1) Class based structure (2) And make separate yaml file or dataConfig-class

- [x] Clean and organize environment setting again 

- [ ] Setup and check the training script of NeMo multichannel diarization

- [ ] Setup Optuna script and re-optimize including the new dataset

- [ ] Plug-in 3rd party ASR (Whisper-v3, wavLM) and report the dev/eval-set performance.

# CHiME-8 DASR Baseline Environment Setup

## SubTracks

### SubTrack-1
### SubTrack-2


## Environment Setup

This README outlines the steps to set up your environment for the required operations. Please follow these steps in the order presented to ensure a proper setup.

### Prerequisites

- Ensure that you have `git`, `pip`, and `bash` installed on your system.
- It's assumed that you have CUDA 11.x compatible hardware and drivers installed for `cupy-cuda11x` to work properly.

## TLDR; 

This environment is based on the assumption that you installed the latest `NeMo` on your conda environment named `chime8_baseline`

```bash
conda activate chime8_baseline
pip install espnet
git clone https://github.com/espnet/espnet.git /workspace/espnet
pip uninstall -y 'cupy-cuda118'
pip install --no-cache-dir -f https://pip.cupy.dev/pre/ "cupy-cuda11x[all]==12.1.0"
pip install git+http://github.com/desh2608/gss
pip install optuna
pip install lhotse==1.14.0
pip install --upgrade jiwer
./hyper_optim/ngc_install_lm.sh "/your/path/to/NeMo"
```

### Detailed Installation Steps for ESPnet and Related Tools

Use pip to install ESPnet, a toolkit for end-to-end speech processing.

```bash
pip install espnet
```

Clone the ESPnet repository into the `/workspace/espnet` directory.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/espnet/espnet.git /workspace/espnet
```

If you have `cupy-cuda118` installed, uninstall it.

```bash
pip uninstall -y 'cupy-cuda118'
```

Install version `12.1.0` of `cupy-cuda11x`. This is done from a pre-release channel.

```bash
pip install --no-cache-dir -f https://pip.cupy.dev/pre/ "cupy-cuda11x[all]==12.1.0"
```

Install GSS from the provided GitHub repository.

```bash
pip install git+http://github.com/desh2608/gss
```

Optuna, a hyperparameter optimization framework, is installed via pip.

```bash
pip install optuna
```

Install a specific version of Lhotse (`1.14.0`).
Lhotse is mainly needed for Guided Source Separation (GSS) part.

```bash
pip install lhotse==1.14.0
```

Upgrade Jiwer, a package for evaluating automatic speech recognition.
Jiwer is needed for evaluating and normalizing the text.

```bash
pip install --upgrade jiwer
```

Run the script to install the language model.

```bash
./hyper_optim/ngc_install_lm.sh
```

# How to launch NeMo CHiME-8 Baseline

## 1. Create NeMo style manifest files

This script will generate NeMo style 

```bash
NEMO_ROOT="/your/path/to/NeMo" # cloned NeMo branch: dev/chime7
NEMO_MSASR_MANIFEST="/your/path/to/nemo_msasr_manifest" # Folder that contains nemo manifest .json files
CHIME7_CLEANED_DATA_FOLDER="/your/path/to/chime7_official_cleaned" # Folder that contains sub-folders named: chime6, dipco, mixer6
python ${NEMO_ROOT}/scripts/chime7/manifests/prepare_nemo_manifest_rttm_ctm_for_infer.py --data-dir ${CHIME7_CLEANED_DATA_FOLDER} --subset ${DATA_SPLIT} --output-dir ${NEMO_MSASR_MANIFEST} \
```

## 2. Setup global varialbes (This is temporary, will be removed in the final format)

Use the main inference script: `<NeMo Root>//scripts/chime7/pipeline/run_full_pipeline.py`

You need to fill the paths to the following variables.
Make sure to setup your CHIME8 Data path, temporary directory with write permissions and NeMo root path where NeMo toolkit is cloned.

```python
NEMO_ROOT="/path/to/NeMo"
CHECKPOINTS="/path/to/checkpoints"
TEMP_DIR="/temp/path/to/chime8_baseline_each1sess"
CHIME_DATA_ROOT="/path/to/chime7_official_cleaned"
SCENARIOS="[mixer6,chime6,dipco]"
DIAR_CONFIG="chime8-baseline-mixer6-short1"
```

## 3. Launch CHiME-8 Baseline 

Before launch the following script, make sure to activate your Conda environment.
```bash
conda activate chime8_baseline
```

Launch the following script after plugging in all the varialbes needed.

```bash
###########################################################################
### YOUR CUSTOMIZED CONFIGURATIONS HERE ###################################
NEMO_ROOT=/path/to/NeMo
CHECKPOINTS=/path/to/checkpoints
TEMP_DIR=/temp/path/to/chime8_baseline_each1sess
CHIME_DATA_ROOT=/path/to/chime7_official_cleaned
SCENARIOS="[mixer6,chime6,dipco]"
DIAR_CONFIG="chime8-baseline-mixer6-short1"
###########################################################################
cd $NEMO_ROOT
export CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES="0"

SCRIPT_NAME=${NEMO_ROOT}/scripts/chime7/pipeline/run_full_pipeline.py
python -c "import kenlm; print('kenlm imported successfully')" || exit 1

CONFIG_PATH=${NEMO_ROOT}/scripts/chime7/pipeline
YAML_NAME="chime_config_t385.yaml"

ASR_MODEL_PATH=${CHECKPOINTS}/rnnt_ft_chime6ANDmixer6_26jun_avged.nemo
LM_MODEL_PATH=${CHECKPOINTS}/7gram_0001.kenlm
VAD_MODEL_PATH=${CHECKPOINTS}/frame_vad_chime7_acrobat.nemo
MSDD_MODEL_PATH=${CHECKPOINTS}/msdd_v2_PALO_bs6_a003_version6_e53.ckpt 

SITE_PACKAGES=`$(which python) -c 'import site; print(site.getsitepackages()[0])'`
export KENLM_ROOT=$NEMO_ROOT/decoders/kenlm
export KENLM_LIB=$NEMO_ROOT/decoders/kenlm/build/bin
export PYTHONPATH=$NEMO_ROOT/decoders:$PYTHONPATH
export PYTHONPATH=$SITE_PACKAGES/kenlm-0.2.0-py3.10-linux-x86_64.egg:$PYTHONPATH
export PYTHONPATH=$NEMO_ROOT:$PYTHONPATH

python ${SCRIPT_NAME} --config-path="${CONFIG_PATH}" --config-name="$YAML_NAME" \
diar_config=${DIAR_CONFIG} \
chime_data_root=${CHIME_DATA_ROOT} \
output_root=${TEMP_DIR} \
scenarios=${SCENARIOS} \
subsets="[dev]" \
asr_model_path=${ASR_MODEL_PATH} \
lm_model_path=${LM_MODEL_PATH} \
diarizer.vad.model_path=${VAD_MODEL_PATH} \
diarizer.msdd_model.model_path=${MSDD_MODEL_PATH} \
```
